=begin html

<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="standard.css" />
<script type="text/javascript" src="navigation.js"></script>
<style>
p  { text-align: justify; margin-left: 4mm; margin-right: 4mm }
dt { text-align: justify; margin-left: 4mm; margin-right: 4mm; margin-bottom: -6pt }
pre { margin-left: 4mm; margin-right: 4mm; background-color: rgb(248,248,240); border: 1px solid rgb(128,128,128); padding: 3pt; overflow: auto }
</style>
<body onload="navigation('Oct. 2008')"><div id="navitop"></div><div id="pagehdr"></div>

=end html

=head1 NAME

zimap - IMap Tools [Launcher for ZIMapAdmin and ZIMapShell]

=head1 SYNOPSIS

=over 7

=item B<zimap> [I<options>...] [B<logfile> I<path>] [B<server> I<name>] [B<admin>|B<run>|B<shell>|I<action>] [I<arguments>...] [B<--> I<commands>...]

=item B<zimap credentials> [I<server> [I<account>]]

=item B<zimap> B<-help>

=back

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This script manages defaults, credentials and connection URLs for your IMap servers in a
Linux friendly way.  After resolving defaults and configuration the script launches the
B<ZIMapAdmin> program or the B<ZIMapShell> tool. This can greatly simplify connecting and
logging-on to multiple IMap servers.

Furthermore you can pass command sequences (batches) from the command line to the
B<ZIMapAdmin> program.  This can be used to automate the creation or deletion of accounts
or to export or to import mail data and is a very powerfull feature for advanced IMap
administrators.

There is special support for Samba - B<zimap> can act as a proxy for the scripts that the
Samba daemon calls for user management actions when working as a domain controller.  This
allows you to automate the creation and deletion (with automatic backup) of user mailboxes.

=head1 EXAMPLES

=over 7

=item B<zimap run>

Run the B<ZIMapAdmin> program and open a connection using defaults for the preferred
server.  You might have to create a credentials file to be able to login at the server
side.  See the B<credentials> example below.

=item B<zimap shell>

Run the B<ZIMapShell> program and open a connection using defaults for the preferred
server.

=item B<zimap server> I<host>

Run the B<ZIMapAdmin> program and open a connection using defaults for the I<host>
server.

=item B<zimap credentials> I<server> I<account>

Creates a credentials file (usually in $HOME/.zimap/) for a given server and (optionally)
for a given account.

=item B<zimap run> I<MySpam> B<-- show>

Run the B<ZIMapAdmin> program and open a connection using defaults for the preferred
server, open the folder I<MySpam> and use the B<show> command to list the mail headers.

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 7

Options can be specified in a short form (hyphen followed by a single letter) or in a
long form (two hyphens followed by three or more letters).  All options must be given
immedeately after the the script name.  The options serve to control the input and
output of the script, but not what actions to take (see below):

=item B<-h> B<--help>

Show a brief usage summary.

=item B<-q> B<--quiet>

Be silent, suppress warnings and informational messages.

=item B<-v> B<--verbose>

Output extra information, pass the B<--debug> option to the launched program.

=item B<-n> B<--nothing>

Do nothing, just quit after parsing the command line.

=item B<-N> B<--no>

Do not prompt for input, assume I<no> as answer for all questions.

=item B<-Y> B<--yes>

Do not prompt for input, assume I<yes> as answer for all questions.

=back

=head1 Actions

Action keywords control the kind of work to be done by the script. Some of the keywords
are immedeately followed by arguments. The order of keywords (plus their arguments) is 
relevant. The keywords can usually be abbreviated to at least three letters.

=over 7


=item B<credentials> [I<server> [I<account>]]

Prompts for credentials to be stored in the user's configuration folder (usually this
is $HOME/.zimap/).  If a I<server> and optionally an I<account> are given they override
the configured defaults. No other actions must be specified.

This action is the preferred way to manage your login credentials. Do not edit the
credentials by hand, the format may change in future versions without notice.

=item B<logfile> I<path>

Copy the console output to the logfile specified by I<path>. Currently this works only
for the B<ZIMapAdmin> program.

=item B<server> I<host>

Overrides the configured preferred host. The argument can be an abbreviated hostname 
(not containing dots) which is matched against a list of configured hosts to expand it.

=item B<shell> [I<account>]

Launches the B<ZIMapShell> program. The I<account> argument is optional and can be used
to override the configured default. No further actions are allowed.

=item B<run> [I<mailbox> | B<-> [I<account> | B<->]]

Launches the B<ZIMapAdmin> program. This is also the default action and is only required
if no other action argument is specified.  An otherwise empty command line would cause
the script to imply the B<--help> option.

The I<mailbox> and I<account> arguments are optional.  A given I<mailbox> will be opened
(with write access).  Use a hyphen to skip this argument.  When an I<account> is given
it overrides the configured default.

=item B<admin>

Launches the B<ZIMapAdmin> program using the configured administrator account.

=item B<add> I<account>...

Shorthand notation used to create new IMAP user accounts. The I<admin> action is implied,
no further actions are allowed.

=item B<remove> I<account>...

Shorthand notation used to remove IMAP user account(s) with backup. The I<admin> action
is implied, no further actions are allowed.

=item B<purge> I<account>...

Shorthand notation used to remove IMAP user account(s) wihtout backup. The I<admin> action
is implied, no further actions are allowed.

=item B<backup> I<account>...

Shorthand notation used to create a backup for account(s). The I<admin> action is implied,
no further actions are allowed.

=item B<restore> I<mboxfile> I<account>

Shorthand notation used to restore mail data for the given I<account> from a previous
backup in I<mboxfile>. The I<admin> action is implied,
no further actions are allowed.

=item B<samba> I<command> I<arguments>...

This action is required when B<zimap> is used in the I<smb.conf> file as a script proxy.
The final script that gets called via Samba must be specified in the B<zimap> configuration.
The purpose of this it to intercept domain management actions like creating or deleting a
user.  The I<admin> action is implied, no further actions are allowed.

Depending on the (new) user's group memberships an IMap account can be created or deleted.
Before deleting an IMap account an automated backup of mail data can be configured. The
B<zimap> configuration file contains some additional information on this topic.

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT

ZIMap, ZIMapLib, ZIMapTools and zimap are (C) 2008 Dr. Juergen Pfennig

This software is published under GPLv3 license
and has been written for educational purposes only,
no warranties! Try it at your own risk.

=begin html

<div id="navibot"></div></body>

=end html

=cut
